Detecting DM around BH with Gravitational Waves:

words/topics of interest:

LIGO/Virgo
KAGRA
LISA
Einstein Telescope
pulsar timing arrays
cold dark matter
dephasing of gravitational waveform
chirp mass?
barycenter position
impact parameter=> b90 degree deflection of DM particle in DF loss equation?
ISCO?
Chandrasekhar????
simpson's rule to evaluate integrals
runge-kutta method
courant-friedrichs-lewy condition




Notes:

they consider intermediate mass-ratio inspirals with intermediate-mass BH dressed with DM.
previous estimates based on fixed DM dress are WRONG for a range of binaries and DM distributions.
This was proven by showing total energy dissipated by compact object through
dynamical friction, as it inspirals through DM environment towards the BH,
is LARGER than the gravitational binding energy of the dark matter dress itself!

the dephasing of the gravitational waveform induced by DM is smaller than previously thought,
BUT still potentially detectable with LISA space interferometer.
WOULD PROVIDE POWERFUL DIAGNOSTICS OF THE PARTICLE NATURE OF DM

I. INTRODUCTION
If dark matter is made of cold collision-less particles, the adiabatic growth of BH's
may induce the formation of large over-densities around supermassive and intermediate-mass BH's.
We can detect and characterize these by measuring their impact on the gravitational waveform
as BHs merge with other compact objects.

IMBH (intermediate-mass black hole) with mass 10^3 = 10^5 solar masses.
presence of DM exerts dynamical frictional force on compact object, causing it to inspiral more rapidly.
The resulting gravitational waveform accumulates phase at a different rate compared to the vacuum case.

work done by dynamical friction ~ total binding energy available in the DM spike
previous assumption of non-evolving dark-matter density profile.

n-body simulation allowed them to accurately model dynamical friction and the scattering of DM particles with the compact object.
allows them to understand where the energy lost by the compact object is injected in the DM cloud.

Will be detectable, smaller than previously assumed, but potentially detectable by the LISA mission.



SECTION II. DEMONSTRATION THAT PREVIOUS APPROACH VIOLATES ENERGY CONSERVATION
Using Newtonian gravity, including dissipative effects arising from
dynamical friction and gravitational radiation.
NEGLECT FEEDBACK ON DM HALO AND ASSUME CIRCULAR ORBIT.

They acquire a way to compute the DM mass within a distance r from previous papers.
They then acquire an equation for the potential energy of the DM spike from inner radius to some radius r (or r sub sp for all).
not taking into account gravitational effects of compact object is fine, since these will be on order q = m2/m1 <= 1

Assumptions with q ratio with corrections of order q.
Assume that barycenter position is equal to the IMBH position.

We got some equations for GW and DF losses!

Fig. 2 shows energy dissipated between a separation r2 and rISCO and plot
the ratio of this energy to the total binding energy of the DM spike.
only parameter changing is the mass ratios q, with increasingly heavy m2.
as q decreases and m2 increases, the system has less issues with energy balance

It will therefore by necessary to modify the distribution of DM in response to the
energy input into the DM spike through DF.



SECTION III. N-BODY SIM. VALIDATING NEW MODEL FOR DYNAMICAL FRICTION.
b_max is a very important impact parameter as it
determines which DM particles in the spike interact gravitationally
with the orbiting compact object and therefore governs how energy is injected into the spike.
They used the gadget-2 ode in order to determine the value of maximum impact parameter.
explained below (3.3)
VERY computationally intensive
kinda getting lost with the softening length and the b impact parameters?

The dynamical friction process therefore takes place only over a small region close to the orbiting compact object.
This implies that it is consistent to model the dynamical friction force for the nonuniform systems
using the local density, and it further implies that the dephasing effect could be used to accurately
trace out the density profile as a function of radius.


SECTION IV. PRESCRIPTION FOR EVOLVING PHASE SPACE DISTRIBUTION OF DM
Assume that orbital elements evolve on a timescale that is long compared to the orbital period.
Assume that the equilibration timescale for the DM halo is much shorter than the timescale for the secular evolution of the system.
Assume that DM halo is spherically symmetric and isotropic and remains so throughout the evolution of the system.

If we can study the evolution of the distribution function f, then we can self-consistently evolve the DM
halo along with the binary and reconstruct the density profile, which is required to calculate the dynamical friction force.

They derive the density profile throughout the spike which in turn is used to evaluate the rate of energy loss due to DF.

Fig. 8???
DM particles are gradually depleted from close to the compact object through scattering; at the end of the simulation,
the density at the orbital radius has dropped to 3% of the initial density.



SECTION V. USE OF PRESCRIPTION TO ACCULATELY FOLLOW EVOLUTION OF BINARY AND DM SPIKE.
they came to some reasonable initial conditions after describing the issue with setting them.

Also, the dynamical friction effect is of a negative
post-Newtonian order for quasicircular binaries, mean-
ing that it is largest when the binary is less relativistic.

feedback on the DM halo leads to a depletion o fthe DM density at the orbital radius.
This in turn reduces the size of the dynamical friction force and thus slows the inspiral.
There is therefore competition between how quickly the compact object depletes DM and
how rapidly dynamical friction causes it to lose energy.

To quantify the sizze of the dephasing effect, we estimate the difference between
the number of GW cycles during the inspiral in vacuum and in the presence of the DM mini-spike,
for both the dynamic and static cases.

Fig. 9
It is clear from Fig. 9 that the maximum allowed size of the dephasing effect, obtained
in this toy model, can be as much as to orders of magnitude smaller than that estimated in the static case.

mismatch in observation time with LISA operation

For a central IMBH with m1 = 10^3 solar mass, assuming a static DM spike with slope gamma_sp = 7/3,
the dephasing effect would reduce the number of GW cycles from the value in vacuum by roughly 5%.
HOWEVER, modeling the dynamics of the spike, which responds to incorporating feedbacker from the orbiting compact object, we find
the dephasing effect is reduced to 0.06%.

Fig. 10 looks important. Frequency evolution of the IMRI system.
Mass ratio q = O(10^-4) is promising target for detecting the effect of a DM spike on the gravitational waveform.

the effects of DM on the emitted GWs will allow properties of the DM distribution to be measured from the observed GWs by an interferometer like LISA.
Further refinements to their numerical procedure will be required to determine the precise size of the dephasing effect in this case.

As well as reducing the number of GW cycles, dynamical friction is also expected to shorten the inspiral time between two fixed frequencies.
We also see that the inspiral time is very sensitive to the slope of the DM distribution,
rapidly becoming undetectable for a mild slope of gamma_sp = 3.2.



SECTION VI. POSSIBLE CAVEATS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR DETECTION.
Possibility that DM particles may diffuse in energy through small-angle scattering with each other, ultimately refilling the depleted regions.
Also, not necessarily spherically symmetric.
Binary will inject angular momentum into the halo just as in injects energy for a torus.
But not bad, because these corrections are of higher order??

Newtonian description not as bad for reasons:
?? i and ii and iii?

We chose the final 5 years of inspiral, because the amplitude of the GWs will be largest during this
last stage of the inspiral, which will typically imply that the system would have the largest signal-to-noise ratio.

In addition, in order to assess the prospects for detection, we must explore in detail
how many such systems we expect to observe and with what properties.



SECTION VII. CONCLUSION
DM over densities around IMBH inevitably modify the dynamics of inspiraling compact objects,
and could potentially be detected through their impact on the gravitational waveform produced by the binary inspiral.

DF in general speeds up the inspiral, reducing the number of GW cycles which would be observed by experiments such as LISA.
For a heavier central IMBH of m2=10^4 solar masses, their prescription leads to only a 50% diff in dephasing, wrt the static case.
The effect however still corresponds to 7300 GW cycles, which should be observable and distinguishable by LISA.

Dynamical friction signicantly shortens the inspiral
time. For a mass ratio q = 10􀀀3, a 5-year inspiral in
vacuum would be shortened by more than 1 year in the
presence of a static DM spike with
sp = 7=3.

We have
however shown that incorporating the feedback on the
dark-matter distribution leads to a dierence in inspiral
time with respect to the vacuum case of only 4 days.

We also found that the dephasing eect is very sensitive
to the slope of the DM distribution, rapidly becoming
less than one gravitational-wave cycle for a mild slope of
sp = 3=2.

We anticipate
that these systems will be detectable and that they could
provide information about the nature of dark matter.
